README.md, before:

# NYC Taxi Trip Analytics Dashboard

A comprehensive fullstack application for analyzing New York City taxi trip data, providing insights into urban mobility patterns and trip characteristics.

## Project Overview

This application processes raw NYC taxi trip data, stores it in a relational database, and presents interactive visualizations through a modern web dashboard. The system enables users to explore trip patterns, analyze fare distributions, and gain insights into city mobility trends.

## Features

### Frontend Dashboard
- **Interactive Visualizations**: Multiple chart types including bar charts, pie charts, and doughnut charts
- **Real-time Filtering**: Filter trips by date range, passenger count, fare range, and distance
- **Advanced Sorting**: Sort data by pickup time, fare, distance, or duration
- **Search Functionality**: Quick search across trip details
- **Responsive Design**: Works seamlessly on desktop and mobile devices
- **Key Metrics Display**: Overview cards showing total trips, average fare, duration, and distance

### Data Insights
- Peak travel hours analysis
- Fare distribution patterns
- Distance and duration statistics
- Payment type breakdown
- Passenger count distribution

## Technology Stack

### Frontend
- **HTML5**: Semantic markup for structure
- **CSS3**: Modern styling with CSS Grid and Flexbox
- **JavaScript (ES6+)**: Interactive functionality and data manipulation
- **Chart.js**: Data visualization library
- **Google Fonts**: Quicksand font family

### Backend
- **Node.js/Express**: Backend framework
- **SQLite**: Relational database (development)
- **RESTful API**: Complete data endpoints
- **CORS Enabled**: Frontend integration ready

## Project Structure

```
Team-6_Taxi_App/
│
├── index.html          # Main HTML file
├── styles.css          # Styling and layout
├── app.js             # JavaScript logic with API integration
├── README.md          # Project documentation
├── setup.sh           # Setup script
│
├── backend/           # Backend API server
│   ├── server.js      # Express server setup
│   ├── package.json   # Node.js dependencies
│   ├── taxi_data.db   # SQLite database (auto-created)
│   └── README.md      # Backend documentation
│
└── data/              # Data files
    ├── raw/           # Raw dataset (for future use)
    └── processed/     # Cleaned data (for future use)
```

## Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
- Modern web browser (Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge)
- Node.js (v14 or higher)
- npm (comes with Node.js)
- Git (for version control)

### Quick Setup

1. **Clone the repository**
```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd Team-6_Taxi_App
```

2. **Run the setup script**
```bash
./setup.sh
```

3. **Start the backend server**
```bash
cd backend
npm start
```

4. **Access the dashboard**
   - Open your browser and navigate to `http://localhost:5000`

### Manual Setup

#### Frontend Only
```bash
# Simply open the HTML file
open index.html
# or use a local server
python -m http.server 8000
```

#### Full Stack (Frontend + Backend)
```bash
# Install backend dependencies
cd backend
npm install

# Start the server
npm start

# Access at http://localhost:5000
```

### Backend Features

The backend provides:
1. **RESTful API** with filtering and pagination
2. **SQLite database** with sample data
3. **Statistics endpoints** for analytics
4. **CORS support** for frontend integration
5. **Health check** endpoint

## Usage

### Using the Dashboard

1. **View Overview Metrics**
   - The top section displays key statistics about the trips
   - Metrics update automatically based on applied filters

2. **Apply Filters**
   - Use the filter section to narrow down trips by:
     - Date range
     - Passenger count
     - Fare range
     - Trip distance
   - Click "Apply Filters" to update the dashboard

3. **Explore Visualizations**
   - View hourly trip distribution
   - Analyze fare patterns
   - Check passenger count distribution
   - Review payment type breakdown

4. **Search and Sort**
   - Use the search bar to find specific trips
   - Select sorting options from the dropdown
   - Navigate through pages using pagination controls

5. **Read Insights**
   - Scroll to the insights section for key findings
   - Insights are automatically calculated from the filtered data

## Custom Algorithm Implementation

### Bubble Sort for Trip Sorting

The application implements a custom bubble sort algorithm for sorting trips by various fields (pickup time, fare, distance, duration).

**Location**: `app.js` - `sortTripsByField()` function

**Algorithm**:
```javascript
function sortTripsByField(trips, field, direction) {
    // Bubble sort implementation
    for (let i = 0; i < trips.length - 1; i++) {
        for (let j = 0; j < trips.length - i - 1; j++) {
            // Compare and swap if needed
            if (shouldSwap) {
                // Swap elements
            }
        }
    }
}
```

**Time Complexity**: O(n²)
**Space Complexity**: O(1)

**Justification**: While not the most efficient sorting algorithm, bubble sort provides a clear, understandable implementation that demonstrates algorithmic thinking. For larger datasets, this could be replaced with quicksort or mergesort.

### Custom Search Algorithm

A linear search implementation for filtering trips based on search terms.

**Location**: `app.js` - `filterTripsBySearch()` function

**Time Complexity**: O(n)
**Space Complexity**: O(n)

## API Integration

The frontend automatically integrates with the backend API:

### Available Endpoints
- `GET /api/trips` - Fetch all trips with filtering and pagination
- `GET /api/trips/stats` - Get aggregated statistics
- `GET /api/trips/hourly` - Get hourly trip distribution
- `GET /api/trips/payment-types` - Get payment type breakdown
- `GET /api/health` - Health check

### Query Parameters
- `page`, `limit` - Pagination
- `sort`, `order` - Sorting
- `startDate`, `endDate` - Date filtering
- `passengerCount` - Passenger count filter
- `minFare`, `maxFare` - Fare range filtering
- `minDistance`, `maxDistance` - Distance range filtering
- `search` - Text search

### Automatic Fallback
The frontend automatically detects API availability:
- ✅ **API Available**: Uses real data from backend
- ❌ **API Unavailable**: Falls back to sample data

This ensures the dashboard works in both development and production environments.

## Data Schema

### Trip Object Structure
```javascript
{
    id: Number,
    pickupTime: String (ISO format),
    dropoffTime: String (ISO format),
    passengerCount: Number,
    tripDistance: Number (miles),
    tripDuration: Number (minutes),
    fareAmount: Number (dollars),
    tipAmount: Number (dollars),
    paymentType: String,
    pickupLat: Number,
    pickupLon: Number,
    dropoffLat: Number,
    dropoffLon: Number
}
```

## Browser Compatibility

- Chrome 90+
- Firefox 88+
- Safari 14+
- Edge 90+

## Performance Considerations

- Chart rendering is optimized with Chart.js
- Pagination limits data display for better performance
- Lazy loading can be implemented for large datasets
- Debouncing on search input for better UX

## Future Enhancements

- [ ] Backend API implementation
- [ ] Database integration
- [ ] Data processing pipeline
- [ ] User authentication
- [ ] Export functionality (CSV, PDF)
- [ ] Advanced analytics and ML predictions
- [ ] Real-time data updates
- [ ] Map visualization with pickup/dropoff locations
- [ ] Comparison mode for different time periods

## Contributing

This is a team project. All team members should:

1. Create feature branches for new work
2. Write clear commit messages
3. Test thoroughly before merging
4. Update documentation as needed
5. Follow the existing code style

## Team Members

- Racheal Resty Akello (r.akeello@alustudent.com)
- Ishimwe Bruno (i.bruno@alustudent.com)

## License

This project is created for educational purposes as part of a university assignment.

## Contact

For questions or issues, please contact the team or create an issue in the repository.

## Acknowledgments

- NYC Taxi & Limousine Commission for the dataset
- Chart.js for visualization library
- Google Fonts for typography

---

*Note*: This is a frontend-only implementation. Backend and database components are to be developed as part of the full assignment requirements.

Commit message:

Add complete assignment-compliant data processing pipeline
✅ ASSIGNMENT REQUIREMENTS IMPLEMENTED:

1. Data Processing and Cleaning (Backend):
   - Load raw NYC dataset (CSV) from train.zip
   - Handle missing values, duplicates, invalid records, and outliers
   - Normalize and format timestamps, coordinates, and numeric fields
   - Define and justify three derived features:
     * Trip Speed (mph) - Identifies traffic patterns and route efficiency
     * Fare per Mile ($) - Measures pricing efficiency and premium routes
     * Idle Time (minutes) - Estimates traffic congestion vs moving time
   - Log excluded or suspicious records for transparency

2. Database Design and Implementation:
   - Design normalized relational schema with appropriate indexing
   - Implement database in SQLite with constraints and integrity checks
   - Write scripts to insert cleaned and enriched data
   - Ensure data integrity and enable efficient queries
   - Create analytical views for common queries

3. Frontend Dashboard Development:
   - Build web-based dashboard using HTML, CSS, and JavaScript
   - Include filtering and sorting options (time, distance, location, fare)
   - Enable dynamic interaction with data (visual summaries, detail views)
   - Present analytical insights using meaningful visualizations

📁 Files Added:
- backend/data_processing/data_cleaner.js - Complete data cleaning pipeline
- backend/data_processing/database_loader.js - Database schema and loading
- backend/data_processing/process_real_data.js - Main processing script
- REAL_DATA_SETUP.md - Comprehensive setup guide
- Updated package.json with data processing dependencies

🚀 Usage:
1. Place train.zip in data/raw/ directory
2. Run: cd backend && npm run process-data
3. Start: npm start
4. Access: http://localhost:5000

The system now fully complies with all assignment requirements!

README.md, after:

# NYC Taxi Trip Analytics Dashboard

A comprehensive fullstack application for analyzing New York City taxi trip data, providing insights into urban mobility patterns and trip characteristics.

## Project Overview

This application processes raw NYC taxi trip data, stores it in a relational database, and presents interactive visualizations through a modern web dashboard. The system enables users to explore trip patterns, analyze fare distributions, and gain insights into city mobility trends.

## Features

### Frontend Dashboard
- **Interactive Visualizations**: Multiple chart types including bar charts, pie charts, and doughnut charts
- **Real-time Filtering**: Filter trips by date range, passenger count, fare range, and distance
- **Advanced Sorting**: Sort data by pickup time, fare, distance, or duration
- **Search Functionality**: Quick search across trip details
- **Responsive Design**: Works seamlessly on desktop and mobile devices
- **Key Metrics Display**: Overview cards showing total trips, average fare, duration, and distance

### Data Insights
- Peak travel hours analysis
- Fare distribution patterns
- Distance and duration statistics
- Payment type breakdown
- Passenger count distribution

## Technology Stack

### Frontend
- **HTML5**: Semantic markup for structure
- **CSS3**: Modern styling with CSS Grid and Flexbox
- **JavaScript (ES6+)**: Interactive functionality and data manipulation
- **Chart.js**: Data visualization library
- **Google Fonts**: Quicksand font family

### Backend
- **Node.js/Express**: Backend framework
- **SQLite**: Relational database (development)
- **RESTful API**: Complete data endpoints
- **CORS Enabled**: Frontend integration ready

## Project Structure

```
Team-6_Taxi_App/
│
├── index.html          # Main HTML file
├── styles.css          # Styling and layout
├── app.js             # JavaScript logic with API integration
├── README.md          # Project documentation
├── setup.sh           # Setup script
│
├── backend/           # Backend API server
│   ├── server.js      # Express server setup
│   ├── package.json   # Node.js dependencies
│   ├── taxi_data.db   # SQLite database (auto-created)
│   └── README.md      # Backend documentation
│
└── data/              # Data files
    ├── raw/           # Raw dataset (for future use)
    └── processed/     # Cleaned data (for future use)
```

## Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
- Modern web browser (Chrome, Firefox, Safari, Edge)
- Node.js (v14 or higher)
- npm (comes with Node.js)
- Git (for version control)

### Quick Setup

1. **Clone the repository**
```bash
git clone <repository-url>
cd Team-6_Taxi_App
```

2. **Run the setup script**
```bash
./setup.sh
```

3. **Start the backend server**
```bash
cd backend
npm start
```

4. **Access the dashboard**
   - Open your browser and navigate to `http://localhost:5000`

### Manual Setup

#### Frontend Only
```bash
# Simply open the HTML file
open index.html
# or use a local server
python -m http.server 8000
```

#### Full Stack (Frontend + Backend)
```bash
# Install backend dependencies
cd backend
npm install

# Start the server
npm start

# Access at http://localhost:5000
```

### Backend Features

The backend provides:
1. **RESTful API** with filtering and pagination
2. **SQLite database** with real NYC taxi data processing
3. **Data cleaning pipeline** for raw dataset processing
4. **Statistics endpoints** for analytics
5. **CORS support** for frontend integration
6. **Health check** endpoint

### Real Dataset Processing

For assignment compliance with the official NYC Taxi Trip Dataset:

1. **Place `train.zip`** in `data/raw/` directory
2. **Run data processing**:
   ```bash
   cd backend
   npm run process-data
   ```
3. **Start the server**:
   ```bash
   npm start
   ```

See [REAL_DATA_SETUP.md](REAL_DATA_SETUP.md) for detailed instructions.

## Usage

### Using the Dashboard

1. **View Overview Metrics**
   - The top section displays key statistics about the trips
   - Metrics update automatically based on applied filters

2. **Apply Filters**
   - Use the filter section to narrow down trips by:
     - Date range
     - Passenger count
     - Fare range
     - Trip distance
   - Click "Apply Filters" to update the dashboard

3. **Explore Visualizations**
   - View hourly trip distribution
   - Analyze fare patterns
   - Check passenger count distribution
   - Review payment type breakdown

4. **Search and Sort**
   - Use the search bar to find specific trips
   - Select sorting options from the dropdown
   - Navigate through pages using pagination controls

5. **Read Insights**
   - Scroll to the insights section for key findings
   - Insights are automatically calculated from the filtered data

## Custom Algorithm Implementation

### Bubble Sort for Trip Sorting

The application implements a custom bubble sort algorithm for sorting trips by various fields (pickup time, fare, distance, duration).

**Location**: `app.js` - `sortTripsByField()` function

**Algorithm**:
```javascript
function sortTripsByField(trips, field, direction) {
    // Bubble sort implementation
    for (let i = 0; i < trips.length - 1; i++) {
        for (let j = 0; j < trips.length - i - 1; j++) {
            // Compare and swap if needed
            if (shouldSwap) {
                // Swap elements
            }
        }
    }
}
```

**Time Complexity**: O(n²)
**Space Complexity**: O(1)

**Justification**: While not the most efficient sorting algorithm, bubble sort provides a clear, understandable implementation that demonstrates algorithmic thinking. For larger datasets, this could be replaced with quicksort or mergesort.

### Custom Search Algorithm

A linear search implementation for filtering trips based on search terms.

**Location**: `app.js` - `filterTripsBySearch()` function

**Time Complexity**: O(n)
**Space Complexity**: O(n)

## API Integration

The frontend automatically integrates with the backend API:

### Available Endpoints
- `GET /api/trips` - Fetch all trips with filtering and pagination
- `GET /api/trips/stats` - Get aggregated statistics
- `GET /api/trips/hourly` - Get hourly trip distribution
- `GET /api/trips/payment-types` - Get payment type breakdown
- `GET /api/health` - Health check

### Query Parameters
- `page`, `limit` - Pagination
- `sort`, `order` - Sorting
- `startDate`, `endDate` - Date filtering
- `passengerCount` - Passenger count filter
- `minFare`, `maxFare` - Fare range filtering
- `minDistance`, `maxDistance` - Distance range filtering
- `search` - Text search

### Automatic Fallback
The frontend automatically detects API availability:
- ✅ **API Available**: Uses real data from backend
- ❌ **API Unavailable**: Falls back to sample data

This ensures the dashboard works in both development and production environments.

## Data Schema

### Trip Object Structure
```javascript
{
    id: Number,
    pickupTime: String (ISO format),
    dropoffTime: String (ISO format),
    passengerCount: Number,
    tripDistance: Number (miles),
    tripDuration: Number (minutes),
    fareAmount: Number (dollars),
    tipAmount: Number (dollars),
    paymentType: String,
    pickupLat: Number,
    pickupLon: Number,
    dropoffLat: Number,
    dropoffLon: Number
}
```

## Browser Compatibility

- Chrome 90+
- Firefox 88+
- Safari 14+
- Edge 90+

## Performance Considerations

- Chart rendering is optimized with Chart.js
- Pagination limits data display for better performance
- Lazy loading can be implemented for large datasets
- Debouncing on search input for better UX

## Future Enhancements

- [ ] Backend API implementation
- [ ] Database integration
- [ ] Data processing pipeline
- [ ] User authentication
- [ ] Export functionality (CSV, PDF)
- [ ] Advanced analytics and ML predictions
- [ ] Real-time data updates
- [ ] Map visualization with pickup/dropoff locations
- [ ] Comparison mode for different time periods

## Contributing

This is a team project. All team members should:

1. Create feature branches for new work
2. Write clear commit messages
3. Test thoroughly before merging
4. Update documentation as needed
5. Follow the existing code style

## Team Members

- Racheal Resty Akello (r.akeello@alustudent.com)
- Ishimwe Bruno (i.bruno@alustudent.com)

## License

This project is created for educational purposes as part of a university assignment.

## Contact

For questions or issues, please contact the team or create an issue in the repository.

## Acknowledgments

- NYC Taxi & Limousine Commission for the dataset
- Chart.js for visualization library
- Google Fonts for typography

---

*Note*: This is a frontend-only implementation. Backend and database components are to be developed as part of the full assignment requirements.
